------------------------------------------vi editor commands -------------------------

1) Commands and their Description

   	 vi filename: Creates a new file if it already not exist, otherwise opens existing file.
   	 vi -R filename : Opens an existing file in read only mode.
   	 view filename : Opens an existing file in read only mode
   	 
2) Moving within a File(Navigation):

    Commands and their Description

        k : Moves the cursor up one line.
        j : Moves the cursor down one line.
        h : Moves the cursor to the left one character position.
        l : Moves the cursor to the right one character position.
        0 or | : Positions cursor at beginning of line.
        $ : Positions cursor at end of line.
        W : Positions cursor to the next word.
        B : Positions cursor to previous word.
        ( : Positions cursor to beginning of current sentence.
        ) : Positions cursor to beginning of next sentence.
        H : Move to top of screen.
        nH : Moves to nth line from the top of the screen.
        M : Move to middle of screen.
        L : Move to bottom of screen.
        nL : Moves to nth line from the bottom of the screen.
        colon along with x : Colon followed by a number would position the cursor on line number represented by x.
        
3) Control Commands(Scrolling): 

    Commands and their Description:

        CTRL+d : Move forward 1/2 screen.
        CTRL+f : Move forward one full screen.
        CTRL+u : Move backward 1/2 screen.
        CTRL+b : Move backward one full screen.
        CTRL+e : Moves screen up one line.
        CTRL+y : Moves screen down one line.
        CTRL+u : Moves screen up 1/2 page.
        CTRL+d : Moves screen down 1/2 page.
        CTRL+b : Moves screen up one page.
        CTRL+f : Moves screen down one page.
        CTRL+I : Redraws screen.
        
        
        
4) Editing and inserting in Files(Entering and Replacing Text): 

        i : Inserts text before current cursor location.
        I : Inserts text at beginning of current line.
        a : Inserts text after current cursor location.
        A : Inserts text at end of current line.
        o : Creates a new line for text entry below cursor location.
        O : Creates a new line for text entry above cursor location.
        r : Replace single character under the cursor with the next character typed.
        R : Replaces text from the cursor to right.
        s : Replaces single character under the cursor with any number of characters.
        S :Replaces entire line.
        
5) Deleting Characters: 

        X Uppercase: Deletes the character before the cursor location.
        x Lowercase : Deletes the character at the cursor location.
        Dw : Deletes from the current cursor location to the next word.
        d^ : Deletes from current cursor position to the beginning of the line.
        d$ : Deletes from current cursor position to the end of the line.
        Dd : Deletes the line the cursor is on.       
        
6) Copy and Past Commands: 

	dd :cut
        Yy : Copies the current line.
        9yy : Yank current line and 9 lines below.
        p : Puts the copied text after the cursor.
        P : Puts the yanked text before the cursor.
        
        
7) Save and Exit Commands of the ex Mode : 

        q : Quit
        q! : Quit without saving changes i.e. discard changes.
        r fileName : Read data from file called fileName.
        wq : Write and quit (save and exit).
        w fileName : Write to file called fileName (save as).
        w! fileName : Overwrite to file called fileName (save as forcefully).
        !cmd : Runs shell commands and returns to Command mode.
        
        
8) Searching and Replacing in (ex Mode): 

			:s/string 

			For example, suppose we want to search some text for the string “geeksforgeeks” Type the following and press ENTER:

			:s/geeksforgeeks

        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
